PCP-6627 - Override Cluster API Properties feature (#10478)
spectrocloud/librarium: docs/docs-content/architecture/override-capi-properties/azure-capi-override-reference.md

---
sidebar_label: "Azure CAPI Override Reference"
title: "Azure CAPI Override Reference"
description: "Discover examples and references for overriding CAPI properties on Azure clusters."
icon: ""
hide_table_of_contents: false
tags: ["architecture", "capi", "cluster api", "advanced configuration", "azure"]
---

This page provides examples and references for overriding Cluster API (CAPI) properties on Azure clusters using Cluster

> API for Azure (CAPZ).

Author: ```suggestion
API Provider Azure (CAPZ).
```

| ------- | -------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| All     | -                          | [CAPZ Book - API Reference](https://capz.sigs.k8s.io/reference/reference) <br /> \*Use with caution as this reference guide is not semantically versioned.             |
| Cluster | `AzureManagedControlPlane` | [v1.18.0 AzureManagedControlPlane API types](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-azure/blob/v1.18.0/api/v1beta1/azuremanagedcontrolplane_types.go) |
| Pool    | `AzureManagedMachinePool`  | [v1.18.0 AzureManagedMachinePool API types](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-azure/blob/v1.18.0/api/v1beta1/azuremanagedmachinepool_types.go)   |

### Examples

These examples demonstrate how to override CAPI properties using YAML directly targeting the underlying CAPZ resources.

#### Cluster-Level

> ```yaml title="Set auto-upgrade channel, enable OIDC issuer, and enable workload identity"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml title="Set auto-upgrade channel, enable OpenID Connect (OIDC) issuer, and enable workload identity"
```

azureManagedControlPlane:
  spec:
    autoUpgradeProfile:
      upgradeChannel: patch
    oidcIssuerProfile:
      enabled: true
    securityProfile:
      workloadIdentity:
        enabled: true
```

> ```yaml title="Set DNS prefix for control plane FQDN"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml title="Set DNS prefix for control plane Fully Qualified Domain Name (FQDN)"
```

Author: I may raise this with the team, as I'm sure we were going to add it to the "no-expand" list in Vale.

azureManagedControlPlane:
  spec:
    dnsPrefix: aksdemo-updated
```

#### Pool-Level

> ```yaml title="Set Max Pods, Kubelet disk type, and disable public IPs"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```yaml title="Set max pods, Kubelet disk type, and disable public IPs"
```

azureManagedMachinePool:
  spec:
    maxPods: 30
    kubeletDiskType: OS
    enableNodePublicIP: false
```

```yaml title="Set VM size, OS disk size, and node labels"
azureManagedMachinePool:
  spec:
    vmSize: Standard_D8s_v5
    osDiskSizeGB: 256
    nodeLabels:
      env: test
      updated: "true"
```

### Encryption

#### Host Encryption

Host encryption encrypts the OS and temporary disks on the underlying VM host using platform-managed keys. It is

> configured at the pool level using the `enableEncryptionAtHost` field on `AzureManagedMachinePool`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Host encryption encrypts the OS and temporary disks on the underlying VM host using platform-managed keys. You can configure it at the pool level using the `enableEncryptionAtHost` field on `AzureManagedMachinePool`.
```

> :::caution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::warning
```
caution is deprecated

`enableEncryptionAtHost` is immutable and must be set when the node pool is first created. It cannot be enabled or
disabled on an existing pool.

:::

```yaml title="Enable host encryption on a node pool"
azureManagedMachinePool:
  spec:
    enableEncryptionAtHost: true
```

#### Disk Encryption Sets

CAPZ v1.18.0 does not expose a first-class
[Disk Encryption Set (DES)](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/disk-encryption) field for AKS node
pools. The supported workaround is to use the `asoManagedClusterPatches` field on `AzureManagedControlPlane`, which
applies a JSON merge patch directly to the underlying Azure Service Operator (ASO) `ManagedCluster` resource.

> :::caution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::warning
```
caution is deprecated

The `asoManagedClusterPatches` field is intended for advanced use only. Misconfiguration that conflicts with CAPZ's

> normal operation is possible. Test changes in a non-production environment before applying them to a production cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `asoManagedClusterPatches` field is intended for advanced use only. To avoid misconfiguration that conflicts with CAPZ's normal operation, test changes in a non-production environment before applying them to a production cluster.
```

:::

```yaml title="Enable disk encryption set at the cluster level"
azureManagedControlPlane:
  spec:
    asoManagedClusterPatches:
      - '{"spec": {"diskEncryptionSetReference":
        "/subscriptions/<subscription-id>/resourceGroups/<resource-group>/providers/Microsoft.Compute/diskEncryptionSets/<disk-encryption-set-name>"}}'
```

### Known Immutable Fields

The following fields become immutable after an AKS cluster is created. Attempting to disable them via override after

> they have been enabled will result in an error. You must revert the override change to clear the error and allow the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
they have been enabled results in an error. You must revert the override change to clear the error and allow the
```

cluster to reconcile.

| Field                    | CAPI Kind                  | Notes                                                            |
| ------------------------ | -------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `aadProfile`             | `AzureManagedControlPlane` | Cannot be disabled once enabled.                                 |
| `oidcIssuerProfile`      | `AzureManagedControlPlane` | Cannot be disabled once enabled.                                 |
| `enableEncryptionAtHost` | `AzureManagedMachinePool`  | Must be set at node pool creation. Cannot be changed afterwards. |

### Unsupported First-Class Properties

:::info

Learn more about the difference between first-class properties and override properties in the
[First-Class Support vs. Override](./override-capi-properties.md#first-class-support-vs-override) section.

:::

> The following properties have not been exposed as first-class properties in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following properties are not exposed as first-class properties in the
```

directly to the underlying Azure Service Operator (ASO) `ManagedClustersAgentPool` resource.

:::caution

The `asoManagedClustersAgentPoolPatches` and `asoManagedClusterPatches` fields are intended for advanced use only.
Misconfiguration that conflicts with CAPZ's normal operation is possible. Test changes in a non-production environment
before applying them to a production cluster.

:::

```yaml title="Enable disk encryption set on a node pool"
azureManagedMachinePool:
  spec:
    asoManagedClustersAgentPoolPatches:
      - '{"spec": {"diskEncryptionSetID":
        "/subscriptions/<subscription-id>/resourceGroups/<resource-group>/providers/Microsoft.Compute/diskEncryptionSets/<disk-encryption-set-name>"}}'
```

To apply a disk encryption set at the cluster level, use the equivalent `asoManagedClusterPatches` field on
`AzureManagedControlPlane`:

```yaml title="Enable disk encryption set at the cluster level"
azureManagedControlPlane:
  spec:
    asoManagedClusterPatches:
      - '{"spec": {"diskEncryptionSetID":
        "/subscriptions/<subscription-id>/resourceGroups/<resource-group>/providers/Microsoft.Compute/diskEncryptionSets/<disk-encryption-set-name>"}}'

> ``` -->

Author: Hidden for now as I'm not sure this is supported.

Author: Checking with Engineering before uncommenting.

Author: ````suggestion
#### Disk Encryption Sets

CAPZ v1.18.0 does not expose a first-class `diskEncryptionSetID` field for AKS node pools. The supported workaround is
to use the `asoManagedClustersAgentPoolPatches` field on `AzureManagedMachinePool`, which applies a JSON merge patch
directly to the underlying Azure Service Operator (ASO) `ManagedClustersAgentPool` resource.

:::caution

The `asoManagedClustersAgentPoolPatches` and `asoManagedClusterPatches` fields are intended for advanced use only.
Misconfiguration that conflicts with CAPZ's normal operation is possible. Test changes in a non-production environment
before applying them to a production cluster.

:::

```yaml title="Enable disk encryption set on a node pool"
azureManagedMachinePool:
  spec:
    asoManagedClustersAgentPoolPatches:
      - '{"spec": {"diskEncryptionSetID":
        "/subscriptions/<subscription-id>/resourceGroups/<resource-group>/providers/Microsoft.Compute/diskEncryptionSets/<disk-encryption-set-name>"}}'
```

To apply a disk encryption set at the cluster level, use the equivalent `asoManagedClusterPatches` field on
`AzureManagedControlPlane`.

```yaml title="Enable disk encryption set at the cluster level"
azureManagedControlPlane:
  spec:
    asoManagedClusterPatches:
      - '{"spec": {"diskEncryptionSetID":
        "/subscriptions/<subscription-id>/resourceGroups/<resource-group>/providers/Microsoft.Compute/diskEncryptionSets/<disk-encryption-set-name>"}}'
```
````
